In this video we'll be going
over the different types of GIS
data.
GIS data is data that has
geographic information
referenced to specific locations
on Earth.
You can see that we're looking
at an area in between Guinea and
Liberia.
We'll be using this area to add
different data layers to
demonstrate the different types
of GIS data you can come across.
GIS data falls into two
different categories, vector or
raster. Vector data is data
represented by either points,
lines or polygons.
First of all, let's take a look
at some point data.
So this is point data
representing the locations of
different species of dinosaur
spotted within this area.
So you can see that each data
point tells us which species was
sighted, and it gives the XY
coordinate for where the species
was sighted.
So point data is normally used
to show the location of features
and points of interest, for
example the sightings of species
or cities or buildings.
We can't use this data to
measure area or length, but we
can measure density by
calculating the number of points
within a specific area.
OK, let's move on to line data.
So our line data here is
representing the roads and
tracks within this area.
Line data is used to represent
linear features like roads or
rivers or paths.
This type of GIS data has one
dimension, meaning we can use it
to calculate the length, For
example the length of this road.
Next, let's take a look at
polygon data.
So this polygon is representing
the protected area of Ziama.
Polygons are used to represent
areas, for example protected
areas or lakes or forests.
This type of GIS data has 2
dimensions and so we can use
polygons to calculate the area,
for example the area of Ziama.
So these are the three types of
vector data.
Point
Line
and Polygon.
So now let's take a look at
raster data.
So we can think of raster data
as like a photograph made-up of
pixels, where each pixel
represents a value. Raster data
can be discrete or continuous.
This is a discrete raster
showing the land cover within
this area.
It's discrete as each cell has a
distinct separate value that
represents a category or number.
So if we zoom in here,
we can see that each cell
corresponds with a type of land
cover.
If we click on an orange cell
for example,
we can see that it's got a value
of four and this is
corresponding to active
agriculture.
So now let's take a look at a
continuous raster.
So this continuous raster is
representing elevation.
Continuous rasters also have
grid cells, but with gradually
changing data so each cell has a
value within a range. For this
elevation raster, each cell will
have a value within zero to 1386
metres. So if we zoom in, we can
still
see that it's made-up of lots of
cells and these cells have a
value within this range of 0 to
So aerial photographs are also a
type of continuous raster.
So that's the different types of
GIS data. To recap, GIS data can
be a vector or raster, and
vector data can be points,
lines
or polygons.
And raster data
is made-up of cells with
different values and can be
discrete
or continuous.